See discussions, stats, and author profiles for this publication at: https://www.researchgate.net/publication/282663370
Film Recommendation Systems using Matrix Factorization and Collaborative
Filtering
Conference Paper · November 2014
DOI: 10.1109/ICITSI.2014.7048228
CITATIONS
14
READS
2,693
2 authors:
Mirza Ilhami
STMIK-STIE Mikroskil
1 PUBLICATION   14 CITATIONS   
SEE PROFILE
Suharjito Suharjito
Bina Nusantara University, Jakarta, Indonesia
150 PUBLICATIONS   1,434 CITATIONS   
SEE PROFILE
All content following this page was uploaded by Suharjito Suharjito on 09 October 2015.
The user has requested enhancement of the downloaded file.

978-1-4799-6527-4/14/$31.00 ©2014 IEEE 
Film Recommendation Systems using Matrix 
Factorization and Collaborative Filtering 
Mirza Ilhami 
Informatics Technology Department 
Faculty of Informatics Technology 
STMIK Mikroskil 
Medan, Indonesia 
mr.ilhami@gmail.com 
Suharjito 
Magister in Information Technology 
Binus Graduate Program 
Bina Nusantara University 
Jakarta, Indonesia 
harjito@yahoo.com 
Abstract — Collaborative filtering method was widely used in 
the recommendation system. This method was able to provide 
recommendations to the user through the similarity values 
between users. However, the central issues in this method were 
new user issue and sparsity. This paper discusses about how to 
use matrix factorization and nearest-neighbour in film 
recommendation systems. Both of methods will be used in order 
to make more accurate recommendations. Based on the 
experiments results, the combination of matrix factorization and 
classical collaborative filtering (nearest neighbor) could improve 
the prediction accuracy. It can be concluded that the combination 
of matrix factorization and nearest-neighbor produced a better 
prediction accuracy 
Keywords— Recommendation Systems; Matrix Factorization; 
Collaborative Filtering. 
I.  INTRODUCTION (HEADING 1) 
Recommendation systems has been rapidly growing due to 
huge data informations available. We need a personalized 
systems that can be match to us, based on what we read 
recently, our last activities, and how its relevance to us. 
Recommendation systems become more popular today and has 
been used in various fields. 
Collaborative filtering has been the mostly used in 
recommendation systems nowaday. This method was able to 
give recommendation to user based on their similarity to 
others. On the other hand, matrix factorization has also been 
familiar since Netflix Grand Prize [1]. 
Generally, recommendation system can be divide into two 
parts, the Content-based Filtering and Collaborative Filtering. 
Content-based filtering based on the similarity of the items to 
the object that the user liked in the past [ 2]. Meanwhile, 
Collaborative filtering is the process of evaluation using the 
information of user behavior or the behavior of other users 
[3].Collaborative filtering grouped by memory-based and 
model-based.  
Some of the central issues in the collaborative filtering is 
sparsity, content analysis, overspecialization and new user 
issue (cold start problem) [4]. Hybrid method was used in 
order to solve this problems. Hybrid is a combination between 
several methods. This method was also a key that brought 
Bellkor team as the winner in Netflix Prize in 2009 [5]. 
Based on [ 6], matrix factorization can be used to increase 
the prediction accuracy in scalable dataset. Other than, matrix 
factorization also can be used to remove the dimension of the 
item space and retrieve latent relations between items of the 
dataset. 
For experiments purpose, Movielens Hetrec 2011 rating 
data will be used in this paper. The rating data will be used for 
computation in recommendation and prediction algorithm.The 
combination of matrix factorization and classic collaborative 
filtering (nearest-neighbour) technique will be used to improve 
the prediction accuracy. 
Preliminary section 3 discusses how the dataset will be 
used. In section 4, we describe the mathematical approach of 
our recommender. Prediction accuracy was evaluated in 
section 5. Finally, the  conclusions in section 6. 
II. RELATED  WORK
In this section we briefly review the main works in the 
context. The list of references is not exhaustive due to the 
page limit. Our main focus was in collaborative filtering 
which has been successfully applied to several real world 
problems, such as Netflix’s movie recommendation. 
A. Content-based Filtering 
Content-based method is one of the oldest methods and 
most popular in the recommendation. The principle of this 
method is recommend object that has similarities to some 
other object, the user preferred in the past [ 2]. The similarity 
between objects was determined from the values of the 
characteristics of the object. 
Fig. 1 shows an example of a content-based filtering. Well-
known relationship marked by full arrows, calculations or 
similarity of objects marked with an arrow point and 
predictive relationship marked by dotted arrows. 
International Conference on Information Technology Systems and Innovation (ICITSI) 2014
Bandung-Bali, 24-27 November 2014
ISBN: 978-1-4799-6526-7 
1

Fig. 1: Content-based filtering [4] 
 
This method was widely used in text-based applications, to 
recommend a document or web site, according to [ 4]. One 
implementation of a content-based is the Music Gnome 
Project and WebMate. 
B. Collaborative Filtering 
Collaborative filtering was one of the most widely used 
techniques for recommendation systems. Companies like 
Google [7], Amazon [8] using the recommendation, at least in 
part based on collaborative filtering. CFwas a popular 
recommendation algorithm that bases its predictions and 
recommendations on ratings or opinions of other users in the 
system [ 3]. Typically, predictions about user interests were 
obtained by collecting taste information from many other 
similar users. The fundamental assumption of this method was 
that the tastes of other users can be selected and assembled in 
such a way to give a reasonable prediction of the active user's 
preference. CF requires a large amount of information to be 
processed, including large-scale data sets such as the e-
commerce and web applications. Over the past few decades 
CF has been continuously improved and has become one of 
the most prominent personalization techniques in the field of 
recommendation systems. 
Fig. 2. show an example of a collaborative filtering. Full-
line arrows represent the relationships were already known. 
Both subjects had ties with the goods and therefore they were 
considered to have similarities. Recommendations marked 
with dotted arrows. An object can be recommended for 
selected of objects related to the same subject, so the subject 
was not related to the object. 
 
 
Fig. 2:Collaborative filtering [4] 
 
Based on the approach of unknown relationships, 
collaborative filtering can be divided into two groups: a 
memory-based and model-based. 
 
C. Hybrid Recommendation Method 
Hybrid method combining two or more methods of 
recommendation with the aim to improve recommendation 
results. There were a number of approaches to incorporate 
practical advice among collaborative filtering, content-based 
filtering, knowledge-based demographics and 
recommendations. The most popular was a combination of 
content-based filtering and collaborative filtering [4]. 
The combination of memory-based collaborative filtering 
and collaborative filtering-based models were often used in 
contemporary commercial recommendations.Fig. 3. show an 
example of hybrid method. 
 
 
Fig. 3:Hybrid Method [4] 
 
Hybrid method can help overcome some of the drawbacks 
of the method recommendations, eg. new item that has not 
been rated by any user. Several methods can be used 
additional recommendations [9]. 
D. Matrix Factorization 
Collaborative filtering recommendation method has been 
widely used in the nearest neighbour (NNH) algorithm 
combined with the pearson correlation or cosine similarity to 
calculate the predicted values. In terms of sparse rating, NNH 
approach usually experience difficulties in finding the right 
match and consequently produce a weak recommendation with 
accuracy. Furthermore NNH calculation algorithm complexity 
tends to increase with number of users and the number of 
items, which means the recommendation system will have 
serious problems in scalability [6]. 
To overcome this problem, a matrix factorization approach 
has been proven to be an efficient method for rating-based 
recommendation [10]. 
 
III. METHODOLOGY 
There were several things that need to be done before the 
recommendation can be made. Firstly, it needsto extract the 
dataset, in order to process recommendations. This section 
will explain how the datawill be used, a hybrid 
recommendation techniques and evaluation methods. 
A. Dataset Analysis 
The Movielens dataset was used in this research, contains 
855,598 ratings for 10197 movies and 2113 users. This dataset 
was an extension of Movielens10M dataset, published by 
Groupleans research group. It links the movies of Movielens 
dataset with their corresponding web pages at Internet Movie 
Database (IMDb)and Rotten Tomatoesmovie review systems. 
The dataset was released in HetRec 2011. The ratings data 
represent as a list of triples userID, itemID and rating. Split 
the dataset into two parts, 80% for training and 20% for 
testing the algorithm. The dataset contains actors, countries, 
directors and genres. For experiment purpose, it only use the 
data rating from users to make recommendations. Fig. 4. show 
how the data format look like. 
 
2

 
Fig. 4: Rating data format 
 
Our main focus was on the userID, movieID and rating. 
Those field will convert into matrix two-dimensional space, 
first dimension was the number of users and second dimension 
is the number of films (M2113 x 10197 ). The valueswere 
represented with numeric. However, the result of matrix M 
will be sparse, mostly the user-item value was empty field. 
Thus, only the available rating data will used in training 
algorithm. 
B. Matrix Notation 
Our experiment willfocus on the film and the user entity. 
Movie data, and user ratings were available in different data 
formats. Each file consists of fields that were interrelated and 
can be extracted to form a matrix notation that will be used to 
make recommendation system. Table1. shows the matrix 
notation that will be used to recommendation system. 
 
TABLE 1: Matrix notation 
user/item film1 film2 film3 n-films 
user1 1 - 2 - 
user2 2 3 - - 
user3 - 2 1 3 
user4 5 4 - 1 
user5 3.5 1.5 5 2 
user6 2.5 2 3 1 
n-user 1 3 - 1 
 
From the table above, rows represented the number of 
users and columns represented the number of movies. 
Whereas, the cell represented the rating value that user given. 
In table above show the construction of  the matrix. Then, that 
matrix will be used into recommendation system. The matrix 
dimension is number of users multiple number of movies. 
Using matrix factorization can find the missing values from 
matrix notation. 
C. Hybridization 
Various techniques have been proposed as a basis for 
recommendation systems: collaborative filtering, content-
based filtering, knowledge-based screening and demographic 
techniques. Each of these techniques has its drawbacks, such 
as the cold-start problems in collaborative filtering and 
content-based filtering [11]. 
There a lot of technique that can be used in 
recommendation system, the mostly used was nearest-
neighbour, item-based filtering [ 8] and matrix factorization 
[12]. Matrix factorization will be used in this paper. Then, 
several experiments to compare the prediction accuracy 
between matrix factorization and the the combination of 
matrix factorization and nearest-neighbour (NNH). Combining 
two or more technique was called hybrid [11]. The objective 
of hybrid was to increase the recommendation accuracy and 
reduce the error. Fig. 2. shows the architecture of hybrid. 
 
 
 
Fig. 5: Hybrid Recommendation System Architecture 
[11] 
 
Fig. 5. shows the big picture of hybrid recommendation 
system works. The underlying from its architecture was data 
training and data testing. The ratio of data training and data 
testing were usually 80:20, however, some papers also use 
70:30. Both of the data will be used to produce the prediction 
value. 
D. Evaluation Method 
The recommendation systems accuracy depend on several 
factors. Such as, number of data, k-values, normalization, and 
many others. There were a lot of performance metrics that can 
be used in research. Generally, it will be used to evaluate and 
analyze the system performance. Some of metric tools to 
evaluate recommender system according to microsoft research 
were Root Mean Square Error  (RMSE) and Mean Square 
Error (MAE) [20]. These metric will be used in our research, 
in order to computes how close the estimates were to the 
values actually observed. This experiment want to minimize 
the prediction Root Mean Square Error (RMSE) on test sets: 
ൌඩͳ
ܰ௜ሻଶ
ே
௜ୀଵ
 
 
In equation above ҧ௜denotes the predicted rating and riwere the 
actual rating of the movie. Whereas, the mathematical notation 
for MAE is: 
ൌͳ
ȁ௨௜ȁ
்
 
 
From the equation above Ƹ௨௜ is prediction value from user u to 
item i dan ௨௜is actual value. 
 
Data 
Training 
 
Prediction Data 
Testing 
Contributing 
Recommender 
Actual 
Recommender 
3

IV. RECOMMENDER SYSTEM 
In this section, the step-by-step of proposed method will be 
more details. It will describe more about the recommendation 
technique, data normalization, matrix factorization and its 
combination with classic collaborative filtering. 
A. Normalization 
The data rating from MovieLens, it was a range between 
rating. The range was from 1 until 5 (0, if no rating). The 
normalizationwas used to remove  the bias. One common 
method of normalization involves having values of each 
feature range from 0 to 1.  
In order to increase the prediction accuracy, the “global 
effect” has to be removed. Generally the combination of user, 
item and all average rating value (ҧ, ݑ&݅were substracted 
from the original data ruito remove the popularity effect [13]. 
 
݅ 
 
After normalize the data, then perform matrix factorization 
to get predictions and recommendations. 
B. Matrix Factorization 
In many cases, matrix factorization was used to remove the 
dimension of the item space and retrieve latent relations 
between items of the dataset [ 12], [ 14]. Based on the 
demonstration on Neflix Grand Prize, matrix factorization 
model was the best nearest-neighbour technique in 
recommendation system. 
Recommendation systems have a large enough data and 
very sparse, this causes a slow process and computational 
predictions inaccurate. So therefore, it need special technique 
in order to minimize the spread of data and speed up the 
computation process, it can be done by matrix factorization 
[12]. There were many methods used to process factorize the 
matrix, such as Singular Value Decomposition (SVD), Non-
negative Matrix Factorization (NMF), and others. SVD 
approach will be used in this paper, it factorize matrix rating 
to be three low dimensional space, left-singular vector (V), 
singular value (S) and right-singular vector (W). 
 
௞௫௡
்  
Multiple k examples were used to make the experiment and 
investigate the result for next experiment. 
C. Predictions 
The comparisonof prediction value and original rating 
were performed in order to get the evaluation about how 
accurate the algorithm works. To predict rating rui, SVD class 
reconstructs the original matrix 
 
் 
 
And the rating prediction equals to: 
 
݆݅ 
 
A rating prediction approximation will very close to the 
original rating values, and it also deliver some predictions of 
the unknown values or missing values. Neighbourhood 
algorithm uses the ratings of the similar users (or items) to 
predict the values of the input matrix. The only difference with 
plain SVD is the way how it computes the predictions. To 
compute the prediction, it uses this equation:  
 
ሻ ൌ
ௌೖሺ௜Ǣ௨ሻ
ௌೖሺ௜Ǣ௨ሻ
 
 
Where Sk (i; u) is the set of k that rate by u, which were most 
similar to i. Sij is the similarity between i and j. 
 
D. Nearest Neighbour 
Another method that will be used in this paper was the 
nearest neigbour approach. Nearest neighbor was a classical 
collaborative filtering technique that still used in 
recommendation systems. This technique will predict the 
value and compare it with matrix factorization. Performed by 
this technique was to find the similarity to the films or users. 
From the experiments carried out in section 5.2 proves that the 
combination of matrix factorization and nearest neighbor can 
improve the prediction accuracy for better recommendation 
system. 
V. EXPERIMENTS 
In this section we carried out tests on datasets that have 
been mentioned above. Tests performed several times on the 
value of k to determine the accuracy of the results of the 
methods that have been mentioned in section IV. 
A. MF Experiment 
The most difficult thing to get better accuracy was to 
determine the optimal k values as paramater in computation. 
Therefore, multiple test by iterating the k valueswere 
performed. 
As ilustrated in Fig. 4, the prediction accuracy was strongly 
depend on the k values. 
 
 
Fig. 6: MF in k-dimensional space 
0.5
0.55
0.6
0.65
0.7
0.75
0.8
0.85
5 1 01 52 02 53 03 54 04 55 0
Results
K
MAE RMSE
4

From Fig. 6.it shows that matrix factorization can result in 
an average prediction accuracy well.From several tested k, 
obtained the best of RMSE and MAE, respectively were 0,78 
and 0,59 with k values were 20 and 35. Results metrics that 
close to 0 were the most good. 
 
B. MF + CF Experiment 
After getting the results of experiments with matrix 
factorization method, the  next experiments will be performed 
by using the combination of matrix factorization and 
collaborative filtering. 
It needs neighbourhood algorithm, which use the similarity 
values of user ratings to predict the value of the input matrix. 
The prediction accuracy resulting from experiment using MF 
+ CF based on the value of k ilustrated in the Fig. 5. 
 
 
Fig. 7: MF+ CF in k-dimensional space 
 
From the fig. 7. shows that the value of k = 30 was the lowest, 
meaning that k = 30 was the most optimum done in this case. 
When we compared with the matrix factorization (MF) in 
previous experiment, the combination of MF & CF has a 
better accuracy rate, were proven by the smaller RMSE value 
or close to 0. All the experimental results can be seen in the 
Table 4. 
TABLE 2: Comparison of RMSE metrics for both 
methods 
K MF MF + CF 
5 0,800966 0.810545 
10 0,798626 0.79244 
15 0,793362 0.803481 
20 0,789719  0.794638 
25 0,791834 0.79704 
30 0,789986 0.788649 
35 0, 789649 0.80757  
40 0,79193  0.802361 
45 0,792893 0.804966 
50 0,791348 0.803322 
 
Table 2. above show the experimental results of the 
comparison between two proposed methods. For the matrix 
factorization method, the smallest RMSE value was 0.789649, 
which k = 35. While for MF + CF method, the smallest RMSE 
value was 0.788649 k = 30. 
VI. CONCLUSIONS 
The combination of MF and CF can indeed be used to 
make predictions and recommendation systems. But it doest 
not have a huge if we compare it with the MF only. In 
experiment we have done, the difference were only 0.001. 
Of course, there were many other parameters that can 
determine the accuracy of predictions, such as the number of 
datasets, content features, normalization, and others. With the 
existance of this paper we hope it can enrich the knowledge in 
the field of recommendation systems and can be used in the 
future for further experiments to improve the prediction 
accuracy. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
For the finishing of this experiment, thank to Mr. Bens 
Pardamean, M.Sc, P.hD., for any criticsm and suggestions. 
And also thank to Grouplens for the dataset and for the rec-sys 
python framework, thanks to Ocelma. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] Yehuda Koren. (2009) The BellKor Solution to the 
Netflix Grand Prize. [Online]. 
http://www.netflixprize.com/assets/GrandPrize2009_B
PC_BellKor.pdf 
[2] Michael J Pazzani and Daniel Billsus, "Content-Based 
Recommendation Systems," The Adaptive Web Lecture 
Notes in Computer Science , vol. 4321, pp. 325-341, 
2007. 
[3] Michael D Ekstrand, John T Riedl, and Joseph A 
Konstan, "Collaborative Filtering Recommender 
Systems," Foundations and Trends in Human–
Computer Interaction, vol. 4, no. 2, pp. 81 - 173, 2010.
[4] Gediminas Adomavicius and Alexander Tuzhilin, 
"Towards the Next Generation of Recommender 
Systems: A Survey of the State-of-the-Art and Possible 
Extensions," IEEE Transaction On Knowledge and 
Data Engineering, vol. 17, no. 6, pp. 734-749, 2005. 
[5] Yehuda Koren, "Factorization meets the neighborhood: 
a multifaceted collaborative filtering model," in 
Proceeding of the 14th ACM SIGKDD international 
conference on Knowledge discovery and data mining , 
New York, NY, USA, 2008, pp. 426-434. 
[6] Yehuda Koren, "Factor in the Neighbors: Scalable and 
Accurate Collaborative Filtering," ACM Transactions 
on Knowledge Discovery from Data, pp. 1-24, 2010. 
[7] Abhinandan Das, Mayur Datar, and Ashutosh Garg, 
"Google News Personalization: Scalable Online 
Collaborative Filtering.," in International World Wide 
Web Conference Committee (IW3C2) , 2007, pp. 271-
280. 
0.5
0.55
0.6
0.65
0.7
0.75
0.8
0.85
5 1 01 52 02 53 03 54 04 55 0
Results
K
MAE RMSE
5

[8] Greg Linden, Brent Smith, and Jeremy York, 
"Amazon.com Recommendation: Item-To-Item 
Collaborative Filtering," 2003. 
[9] Paolo Cremonesi, Roberto Turrin, and Fabio Airoldi, 
"Hybrid algorithms for recommending new items," in 
Proceedings of the 2nd International Workshop on 
Information Heterogeneity and Fu sion in 
Recommender Systems, New York, 2011, pp. 33-40. 
[10] G Takács, I Pilászy, B Németh, and Domonkos Tikk, 
"Investigation of Various Matrix Factorization Methods 
for Large Recommender Systems," in IEEE 
International Conference on Data Mining Workshops , 
Pisa, 2008., pp. 553-562. 
[11] Robin Burke, "Hybrid Web Recommender Systems," in 
Vol. 4321 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science . Berlin 
Heidelberg: Springer-Verlag, 2007, p. 377. 
[12] Yehuda Koren, Robert Bell, and Chris Volinsky, 
"Matrix Factorization Techniques for Recommender 
Systems.," in IEEE Computer Society., 2009, pp. 42-49.
[13] Upendra Shardanand and Pattie Maes, "Social 
information filtering: algorithms for automating “word 
of mouth”," in Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference 
on Human Factors in Computing Systems , New York, 
1995, pp. 210-217. 
[14] Xiaoyuan Su and Taghi M Khoshgoftaar, "A Survey o f 
Collaborative Filtering Techniques," Journal Advances 
in Artificial Intelligence, pp. 1-19, 2009. 
 
. 
 
6
View publication stats

